Release Notes PMM 2.39.0 (#1121)
percona/pmm-doc: docs/release-notes/2.39.0.md

> # Percona Monitoring and Management 2.38.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.39.0
```

![clouds](../_images/PMM_QAN_metadata.png)

## Improvements

- [PMM-6279](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-6279) - [QAN]: PMM 2.39.0 now includes a metadata table for each query. This table contains information such as Node name, Node name, Service name, Service type, and user name for each selected query.
- [PMM-10270](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10270) -[Backup Management]: Enhanced MongoDB Backup Management to support restoring to different replica set clusters with the same configuration.
- [PMM-11999](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11999), [PMM-12257](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12257) - The [Advisors] page now contains a new Technology column that shows the database type for each advisor. This helps you distinguish between MongoDB, MySQL, and PostgreSQL advisors.
- [PMM-11637](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11637) - In PMM 2.39.0, we updated the interface to reflect the new PMM logo as per the new branding.

> - [PMM-11206](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11206) - [Alerting]: Enhanced the **Add rule template** dialog box to support YAML content for multiple alert templates. Alert templates added in bulk are displayed individually on the **Alert rule templates** page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-11206](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11206) - [Alerting]: PMM users now have the ability to easily add multiple **Alert rule templates** at once, whether through the API or UI. When added in bulk, each template will be displayed separately on the **Alert rule templates** page. This enhancement makes it quicker and more efficient to manage your alert rules.
```

- [PMM-12231](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12231) - PMM prevented the users from installing, updating, or removing plugins. The issue has been resolved now.
- [PMM-12263](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12263) - On the MongoDB Cluster Summary dashboard, the **Replication Lag by Set** graph showed the wrong value if **rs** was in the primary-secondary-arbiter (PSA) configuration. It calculated the arbiter's lag from the beginning of the UNIX time (currently >54 years instead of a few seconds). The issue has been resolved now.
- [PMM-12280](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12280) - Fixed an issue where the **Service Summary Panel** on Home Dashboard used the incorrect units to display `Available Memory`.
- [PMM-10665](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10665) - Fixed issue caused QAN to show incorrect values when setting non-default values for performance schema. Make sure to restart pmm-agent after changing the settings for perfschema in MySQL.
- [PMM-10391](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10391) - PMM did not work with external clickhouse versions greater than 22.5.2. The issue has been resolved now.

## Known issues

> **PMM does not allow to install, update or remove plugins**

Reviewer: @atymchuk , @rasika-chivate  let's keep this section only if users on 2.39 are still affected. 
from the Jira I don't see this information.

Author: I have removed this from Known issues.

> # Percona Monitoring and Management 2.38.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.39.0
```

| **Release date:** | Aug 7, 2023                                                                                    |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Installation:** | [Installing Percona Monitoring and Management](https://www.percona.com/software/pmm/quickstart) |

Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is an open-source database monitoring, management, and observability solution for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and MongoDB.

<!---
!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important/Caution"
    Crucial points that need emphasis:

    - Important: A significant point that deserves emphasis.
    - Caution: Used to mean 'Continue with care'.
 --->

## Release Highlights

### MongoDB backups: UI-based restore on a new replica set cluster

Building on the recent MongoDB backup management enhancements, we have now added the option to restore backups on different clusters with the same configuration. This enables you to test restore data before deploying it on Dev environments. 

> Restoring on different clusters is not available for sharded clusters. This is a complicated process that still requires manual intervention. For more information, see [Restoring from a sharded cluster]()

Reviewer: link to the real doc

Author: The link will be available only after the doc is published.

### Query Analytics - Meta information

> QAN is an important tool that can help filter data and identify problematic queries. However, it can be challenging to determine which services, nodes, and other labels are linked to these queries. PMM 2.39.0 now includes a metadata table for QAN to address this issue. This table contains information such as Node name, Node ID, Service name, Service Type, and user name for each selected query. With this feature, you can easily identify the services, nodes, and labels associated with your identified queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QAN is an important tool that can help filter data and identify problematic queries. However, it can be challenging to determine which services, nodes, and other labels are linked to these queries. PMM 2.39.0 now includes a metadata table for QAN to address this issue. This table contains information such as Node name, Service name, Service Type, and user name for each selected query. With this feature, you can easily identify the services, nodes, and labels associated with your identified queries.
```

node ID is removed from the list

To view the metadata table, navigate to the **Main** menu and click on **Query Analytics (QAN)**. This will bring you to the **Query Analytics** page. Next, select the desired query and expand the **Metadata** tab. The metadata for that specific query will then be displayed.

![clouds](../_images/PMM_QAN_metadata.png)

## Improvements

> - [PMM-6279](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-6279) - [QAN]: Query metadata not visible in new UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-6279](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-6279) - [QAN]: Query metadata presentation
```

Author: Updated it.

- [PMM-10270](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10270) -[Backup Management]: Enhanced MongoDB Backup Management to support restoring to different replica set clusters with the same configuration.
- [PMM-11999](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11999) - [Advisors]: Expose check family field in advisors API

> - [PMM-12257](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12257) - [Advisors]: The **Advisors** page now includes a new **Technology** column, showing the database type for each advisor in the table. This helps you easily differentiate between the MongoDB, MySQL and PostgreSQL	advisors.

Reviewer: [PMM-11999] and [PMM-12257] should  be the one line  , we don't need separation for API and UI in  RN

Author: ok

- [PMM-11637](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11637) - In PMM 2.39.0, we updated the interface to reflect the new PMM logo as per the new branding.

> - [PMM-11206](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11206) - [Alerting]: Enhanced the **Add rule template** dialog box to support YAML content for multiple alert templates. Alert templates added in bulk are displayed individually on the **Alert rule templates** page.

Reviewer: I think this  applies to api and ui

Author: @rnovikovP Do we explicitly mention about API?

Reviewer: @artemgavrilov ^

Reviewer 2: UI is reflection of API, so yes it's both

> ## Components updates

Reviewer: Let's move this to the improvements section. no need to pay much attention here, as this is not used separately without pmm

Author: Done

- [PMM-12070](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12070) - We have updated the deprecated [Boomtable plugin](https://github.com/percona/grafana-dashboards/tree/main/panels/yesoreyeram-boomtable-panel) to the Grafana table plugin.
 
## Bugs Fixed

> - [PMM-12151](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12151) - [QAN]: Explain plan not displayed if database name is missing in the query

Reviewer: It wasn't missing  - we used the wrong field. But this is not important.  Let stress on the result: Explain wasn't working in a lot of cases

Author: ok.

> - [PMM-10391](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10391) - PMM did not work with external clickhouse versions greater than 22.5.2. The issue has been resolved now.

Reviewer: let's move this to the  end of the list

Author: ok

- [PMM-11658](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11658) - pmm-agent crashes simultaneously on all nodes

> - [PMM-11992](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11992) - Database name is ignored while adding any Postgres

Reviewer: What was the impact of this "ignoring"?

Author: Users who configured their Postgres databases with names other than "Postgres" were unable to add them. The issue has been resolved now.

> - [PMM-12161](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12161) - "MongoDB Cluster Summary" - too many "Config Services"

Reviewer: we closed this with "won't fix"

Author: Removed

Author: Removed

- [PMM-12231](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12231) - PMM disallows to install, update and remove plugins
- [PMM-12263](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12263) - Wrong Replication Lag by Set values if RS is PSA - MongoDB Cluster Summary
- [PMM-12280](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12280) - Fixed an issue where the **Service Summary Panel** on Home Dashboard used the incorrect units to display `Available Memory`.

> - [PMM-10665](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10665) -  Fixed issue caused QAN to show incorrect values when setting non-default values for performance schema. Make sure to restart pmm-agent after changing the settings for perfschema in MySQL.

Reviewer: Do we have a note about restart in the documentation (not only in RN)
Can be one of the top bugs, very important

- [PMM-11999](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11999) - [Advisors]: Expose check family field in advisors API
- [PMM-12257](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12257) - [Advisors]: The **Advisors** page now includes a new **Technology** column, showing the database type for each advisor in the table. This helps you easily differentiate between the MongoDB, MySQL and PostgreSQL	advisors.
- [PMM-11637](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11637) - In PMM 2.39.0, we updated the interface to reflect the new PMM logo as per the new branding.
- [PMM-11206](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11206) - [Alerting]: Enhanced the **Add rule template** dialog box to support YAML content for multiple alert templates. Alert templates added in bulk are displayed individually on the **Alert rule templates** page.

 
## Bugs Fixed

- [PMM-12151](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12151) - [QAN]: Explain plan not displayed if database name is missing in the query
- [PMM-10391](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10391) - PMM did not work with external clickhouse versions greater than 22.5.2. The issue has been resolved now.

> - [PMM-11658](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11658) - pmm-agent crashes simultaneously on all nodes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [PMM-11658](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11658) - pmm-agent was crashing on AMI and OVF distributions
```

- [PMM-11992](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11992) - Database name is ignored while adding any Postgres
- [PMM-12161](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12161) - "MongoDB Cluster Summary" - too many "Config Services"
- [PMM-12231](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12231) - PMM disallows to install, update and remove plugins

> - [PMM-12263](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12263) - Wrong Replication Lag by Set values if RS is PSA - MongoDB Cluster Summary

Reviewer 3: This one seems to be too cryptic, I suggest we ask the author of the bugfix to provide a better title.

Reviewer: +1 to @atymchuk . we need to explain this

Author: @rnovikovP @atymchuk I have not understood this from the ticket. Could you please help me with the explanation.

Author: On the [MongoDB Cluster Summary](https://pmmdemo.percona.com/graph/d/mongodb-cluster-summary/mongodb-cluster-summary?orgId=1&refresh=1m&search=open) dashboard, the Replication Lag by Set graph showed the wrong value if rs was in the primary-secondary-arbiter (PSA) configuration. It calculated the arbiter's lag from the beginning of the UNIX time (currently >54 years instead of a few seconds). The issue has been resolved now.

@rnovikovP Please confirm if this is correct?

- [PMM-12280](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12280) - Service Summary Panel on Home Dashboard Seems Broken

## Known issues

**PMM does not allow to install, update or remove plugins**

> [PMM-12231](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12231) - In the recent versions of PMM, users have encountered issues with installing, updating and removing plugins from PMM. The cause of this issue is the incorrect permissions assigned to the `/srv/grafana/plugins` directory. These permissions are preventing the grafana component from accessing the directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[PMM-12231](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-12231) - In the recent versions of PMM, users have encountered issues with installing, updating and removing plugins from PMM. The cause of this issue is the incorrect permissions assigned to the `/srv/grafana/plugins` directory. These permissions are preventing the grafana component from writing to the directory.
```

Reviewer: Why this is Known issue - if we fix this in the current release??

Author: @atymchuk If this is fixed. Why do we have a workaround?

**Solution**

> Set the user ownership on the directory`/srv/grafana/plugins` to `grafana:grafana`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set the ownership of the directory`/srv/grafana/plugins` to `grafana:grafana`.
```
